SCENE I PHILINTE, ALCESTE PHILINTE What is it? What’s the matter? ALCESTE, seated Leave me, pray. PHILINTE But tell me first, what new fantastic humour . . . ALCESTE Leave me alone, I say. Out of my sight! PHILINTE But can't you listen, at least, and not be angry? ALCESTE I will be angry, and I will not listen. PHILINTE I cannot understand your gusts of temper; And though we're friends, I'll be the very first . . . ALCESTE, starting to his feet What, I, your friend? Go strike that off your books. I have professed to be so hitherto; But after seeing what you did just now, I tell you flatly I am so no longer And want no place in such corrupted hearts. PHILINTE Am I so very wicked, do you think? ALCESTE Go to, you ought to die for very shame! Such conduct can have no excuse; it must Arouse abhorrence in all men of honour. I see you load a man with your caresses, Profess for him the utmost tenderness, And overcharge the zeal of your embracings With protestations, promises, and oaths; And when I come to ask you who he is You hardly can remember even his name! Your ardour cools the moment he is gone, And you inform me you care nothing for him! Good God! 'tis shameful, abject, infamous, So basely to play traitor to your soul; And if, by evil chance, I'd done as much, I should go straight and hang myself for spite. PHILINTE It doesn't seem to me a hanging matter, And I'll petition for your gracious leave A little to commute your rigorous sentence, And not go hang myself for that, an't please you. ALCESTE How unbecoming is your pleasantry! PHILINTE But seriously, what would you have me do? ALCESTE Be genuine; and like a man of honour Let no word pass unless it's from the heart. PHILINTE But when a man salutes you joyfully, You have to pay him back in his own coin, Make what response you can to his politeness, And render pledge for pledge, and oath for oath. ALCESTE No, no, I can't endure these abject manners So much affected by your men of fashion; There's nothing I detest like the contortions Of all your noble protestation-mongers, So generous with meaningless embraces, So ready with their gifts of empty words, Who vie with all men in civilities, And treat alike the true man and the coxcomb. What use is it to have a man embrace you, Swear friendship, zeal, esteem, and faithful love, And loudly praise you to your face, then run And do as much for any scamp he meets? No, no. No self-respectiog man can ever Accept esteem that 's prostituted so; The highest honour has but little charm If given to all the universe alike; Real love must rest upon some preference; You might as well love none, as everybody. Since you go in for these prevailing vices, By God, you 're not my kind of man, that's all; I'll be no sharer in the fellowship Of hearts that make for merit no distinction; I must be singled out; to put it flatly, The friend of all mankind’s no friend for me. PHILINTE But, while we’re of the world, we must observe Some outward courtesies that custom calls for. ALCESTE No, no, I tell you; we must ruthlessly Chastise this shameful trade in make-beliefs Of friendship. Let's be men; on all occasions Show in our words the truth that's in our hearts, Letting the heart itself speak out, not hiding Our feelings under masks of compliment. PHILINTE There’s many a time and place when utter frankness Would be ridiculous, or even worse; And sometimes, no offence to your high honour, 'Tis well to hide the feelings in our hearts. Would it be proper, decent, in good taste, To tell a thousand people your opinion About themselves? When you detest a man, Must you declare it to him, to his face? ALCESTE Yes. PHILINTE What!—you’d tell that ancient dame, Emilia, That she’s too old to play the pretty girl, And that her painting is a public scandal? ALCESTE Of course. PHILINTE And Dorilas, that he’s a bore; And that he’s wearied every ear at court With tales of his exploits and high extraction? ALCESTE By all means. PHILINTE You are joking. ALCESTE No. I’ll spare No one. My eyes are far too much offended. The court and town alike present me nothing But objects to provoke my spleen; I fall Into black humours and profound disgust, To see men treat each other as they do; There's nowhere aught but dastard flattery, Injustice, treachery, selfishness, deceit; I can't endure it, I go mad —and mean Squarely to break with all the human race. PHILINTE This philosophic wrath’s a bit too savage. I laugh at the black moods I find you in, And think that we, who were brought up together, Are like those brothers in the School for Husbands, Whose ... ALCESTE Heavens, have done your dull comparisons. PHILINTE No, really now, have done your own vagaries. The world will not reform for all your meddling; And since plain speaking has such charms for you, I’ll tell you plainly that your strange distemper Is thought as good's a play, where'er you go; Such mighty wrath against the ways o' the world Makes you a laughing-stock for many people. ALCESTE So much the better! Zounds, so much the better! The very thing I want; I’m overjoyed; 'Tis a good sign. I hate mankind so much, I should be sorry if they thought me wise. PHILINTE You have a great spite against human nature. ALCESTE Yes, I've conceived a frightful hatred for it. PHILINTE And are all mortals, quite without exception, To be included in this detestation? There are some, surely, even now-a-days . . . ALCESTE There’s no exception, and I hate all men: A part, because they’re wicked and do evil; The rest, because they fawn upon the wicked, And fail to feel for them that healthy hatred Which vice should always rouse in virtuous hearts. You see the rank injustice of this fawning, Shown toward the bare-faced scoundrel I’m at law with. The traitor's face shows plainly through his mask, And everywhere he's known for what he is; His up-turned eyes, his honeyed canting voice, Impose on none but strangers. All men know That this confounded, low-bred, sneaking scamp Has made his way by doing dirty jobs, And that the splendid fortune these have brought him Turns merit bitter and makes virtue blush. Whatever shameful names you heap upon him, There's no one to defend his wretched honour; Call him a cheat, a rogue, a cursed rascal, And every one agrees, none contradicts you. But yet his grinning face is always welcomed; He worms in everywhere, he’s greeted, smiled on; And if there is preferment to compete for, Intrigue will win it for him, from the worthiest. Damnation! It offends me mortally To see how people compromise with vice; Sometimes I’m seized upon by sudden longings To flee from all mankind, and live in deserts. PHILINTE Don't take the manners of the time so hard! Be a bit merciful to human nature; Let us not judge it with the utmost rigour, But look upon its faults with some indulgence. Our social life demands a pliant virtue; Too strict uprightness may be blameworthy; Sound judgment always will avoid extremes, And will be sober even in its virtue. The stiff unbending morals of old times Clash with our modern age and common usage; They ask of mortal men too much perfection; We must yield to the times, and not too hardly; And 'tis the very utmost height of folly To take upon you to reform the world. I see a hundred things each day, as you do, That might be better, were they different; And yet, whatever I see happening, I don't fly in a passion, as you do; I quietly accept men as they are, Make up my mind to tolerate their conduct, And think my calmness is, for court or town, As good philosophy as is your choler. ALCESTE But can this calmness, sir, that talks so well, Be moved at nothing? If perchance a friend Betrays you—tries by fraud to steal your fortune— Or if vile slanders are devised against you, Will you behold all this and not get angry? PHILINTE Yes, I can look on faults, at which your soul Revolts, as vices linked with human nature; To put it in a word, I'm no more shocked To see a man unjust, deceitful, selfish, Than to see vultures ravenous for prey, Or monkeys mischievous, or wolves blood-thirsty. ALCESTE What! see myself betrayed, robbed, torn in pieces, And not . . . Good heavens! I won't talk with you, Your reasoning is such sheer sophistry! PHILINTE In truth, you had far better hold your tongue. Storm somewhat less against your adversary, And give some slight attention to your suit. ALCESTE I'll give it none at all—that point is settled. PHILINTE Who will solicit for you, then, d'ye think? ALCESTE Who? Reason, equity, and my just rights. PHILINTE You won't go call on any of the judges? ALCESTE No. Is my cause unjust, or even doubtful? PHILINTE No, I agree with you. But still, intrigue . . . ALCESTE No. I won't stir a step. My mind’s made up. My cause is wrong, or right. PHILINTE Don't trust to that. ALCESTE I shall not budge. PHILINTE Your adversary’s strong, And may, through his cabal, bear off ... ALCESTE No matter. PHILINTE You'll find you've made a great mistake. ALCESTE So be it. I want to see how this thing will turn out. PHILINTE But ... ALCESTE It will be a joy to lose my suit. PHILINTE But surely . . . ALCESTE By this trial I shall see If men can be sufficiently perverse, Rascally, villainous, and impudent To do me wrong before the universe. PHILINTE Lord, what a man! ALCESTE No matter what it costs me, Just for the beauty of the thing, I’d rather My suit were lost. PHILINTE People would laugh at you, Alceste, if they could hear you talk so, truly. ALCESTE So much the worse for those who laughed. PHIMINTE But tell me: This strict integrity that you demand, This truthfulness exact and scrupulous— Say, do you find them here, in her you love? For my part, I’m amazed that you, while being (Or so 'twould seem) so utterly at odds With all the human race, should, spite of all That makes it hateful to you, find in it A charm to stay your eyes. Still more surprising Is that strange choice your heart has fixed upon. Though Eliante, the true, has shown a kindness For you, and though Arsinoé, the prude, Looks on you with an eye of favour, still Your heart rejects their love, while Célimène, Whose taste for slander and coquettish temper So truly ape the manners of the age, Holds it, for pastime, captive in her chains. How happens it that, when you hate our manners So bitterly, you bear with them in her? Are they no longer false when housed so fairly? Do you not see, or do you pardon them? ALCESTE No, no. The love I feel for this young widow Can't make me blind to any of her faults. For all the passion she’s inspired me with, I am the first to see them and condemn them. Yet none the less—I must confess my weakness— Do what I will, she still finds ways to please me; In vain I see her faults, in vain I blame them, Still in my own despite she makes me love her; Her charms prevail; no doubt my love, in time, Will purge her of the vices of the age. PHILINTE If you accomplish that, you will do wonders. You think she loves you, then? ALCESTE By heaven, I do! I could not love her if I didn't think so. PHILINTE But if her fondness for you is confessed, Why should you fret yourself about your rivals? ALCESTE Because a heart that truly loves, demands To have its loved one wholly to itself. I’ve come here now to tell her all I feel Upon this point. PHILINTE If I could have my way I should address my suit to Eliante, Her cousin. She is steadfast and sincere, Esteems you, and would be a fitter choice. ALCESTE Yes, yes, quite true. My reason tells me so Each day. But reason does not govern love. PHILINTE I fear for your affections; and your hope May well . . . SCENE II ORONTE, ALCESTE, PHILINTE ORONTE, to Alceste I learned below that Eliante And Célimène have both gone out a-shopping. But since they told me you were here, I came Up stairs, to pay you, from my very heart, My tribute of unlimited esteem, And tell you of my ardent wish, long-cherished, To be among the number of your friends. Yes, I've a heart that loves to honour merit; I long to see the bonds of friendship join us; And I believe a zealous friend, and one Of my condition, can't well be rejected. (During this speech, Alceste stands musing, and seems not to notice that Oronte is speaking to him.) 'Tis you, by your good leave, that I’m addressing. ALCESTE I, sir? ORONTE Yes, you. I hope I don't offend you. ALCESTE By no means. But I'm very much surprised. I did not look for such an honour, sir. ORONTE My great esteem for you should not surprise you, For you can claim the like from everyone. ALCESTE Sir ... ORONTE Nothing in the state can measure up To that supreme desert men see in you. ALCESTE Sir . . . ORONTE Yes, for me, I hold you far above All that's most eminent in all the nation. ALCESTE Sir ... ORONTE Heaven strike me dead, if I am lying! And for a present witness of my feelings, Pray let me, sir, most heartily embrace you, And ask you for a place among your friends. Your hand, I beg of you. You promise me Your friendship? ALCESTE Sir. . . ORONTE What, you refuse it? ALCESTE Sir, 'Tis too much honour that you wish to do me. But friendship needs a touch of mystery, And asks initiation. We profane Its name, to drag it in on all occasions. It springs from mutual knowledge, mutual choice; Before we form this tie, we need to know Each other better; we might have such natures That we should both repent our hasty bargain. ORONTE 'Pon honour, spoken like a man of sense! And I esteem you for it all the more. We'll let time knit these gentle ties between us; But meanwhile, I am wholly at your service. If you need any favour from the court, 'Tis known I cut some figure with the king; I have his ear, and he has always used me, 'Pon honour, like a perfect gentleman. In short, I’m yours completely, every way; And since you've so much wit, I’ve come to show you, Just to inaugurate our charming friendship, A sonnet that I wrote not long ago, And ask you whether I'd best publish it. ALCESTE Sir, I’m ill fitted to decide such matters; Pray you, excuse me. ORONTE Why? ALCESTE I have the fault Of being more sincere than suits the case. ORONTE The very thing I want. Why, you would wrong me If, when I come for your unfeigned opinion, You should deceive me, hiding anything. ALCESTE Since that is what you wish, sir, I am willing. ORONTE SONNET. It is a sonnet. Hope ... It is A lady who had fanned my flame with hope. Hope ... It is none of your grand pompous lines, But light familiar verse, soft, languishing. (At each interruption he looks toward Alceste.) ALCESTE We'll see, sir. ORONTE Hope ... I don't know if its style Will seem sufficiently clean-cut and facile, Or if the choice of words will satisfy you. ALCESTE Sir, we shall see. ORONTE Besides, I ought to tell you, It took me but a quarter-hour to write it. ALCESTE Out with it, sir. The time can make no odds. ORONTE, reading Hope, it is true, may bring relief And rock to sleep awhile our pain; But, Phyllis, what small gain and brief, If nothing follow in its train! PHILINTE I'm charmed already with this little taste. ALCESTE, aside to Philinte What! Can you have the face to call that fine? ORONTE You showed me some benevolence, But should have shown me less, or none, Nor put yourself to such expense To give me hope, and hope alone. PHILINTE Ah! In what gallant terms these things are phrased! ALCESTE, aside to Philinte Good heavens! Vile flatterer! You're praising rubbish. ORONTE If I must wait eternally, Fordone by love, to death I'll fly, And end my lost endeavour. Then vain your care, my Phyllis fair; Hope and despair are one, I swear, When hope lasts on forever. PHILINTE The ending’s pretty, amorous, admirable, It has a dying fall. ALCESTE, aside Plague take your fall, You devil's poison-monger! Would you'd had The dying fall yourself! PHILINTE I never heard Lines better turned. ALCESTE, aside By heaven! ORONTE You flatter me And think, perhaps . . . PHILINTE I am not flattering. ALCESTE, aside What are you doing then, you vile impostor? ORONTE, to Alceste But you, sir—you remember our agreement. I pray you speak in all sincerity. ALCESTE This is a ticklish subject always, sir; We’re fond of being flattered for our wit. But I was saying, just the other day, To some one—I won't mention any names— On hearing certain verses he had written, That any gentleman should always keep In stern control this writing itch we’re seized with; That he must hold in check the great impatience We feel to give the world these idle pastimes; For, through this eagerness to show our works, 'Tis likely we shall cut a foolish figure. ORONTE And do you mean to intimate by this, That I am wrong to wish . . . ? ALCESTE I don't say that. But I was telling him, a frigid piece Of writing, bores to death; and this one weakness Is quite enough to damn a man, no matter What sterling qualities he have withal; For men are judged most often by their foibles. ORONTE Then do you think my sonnet bad? ALCESTE I don't Say that. But still, as reason for not writing, I tried to make him see how, right among us, This lust for ink has spoiled most worthy men. ORONTE Do I write badly then? D' ye mean I'm like 'em? ALCESTE I don't say that. But still (said I to him) What is your urgent need of making verses? And who the deuce should drive you into print? Only poor creatures writing for a living Can ever be excused for publishing A wretched book. Come, come, resist temptation, Conceal this sort of business from the public, And don't, for anything, go and abandon Your reputation as a gentleman To get in place on't, from a greedy printer, That of ridiculous and wretched scribe. That's what I tried to make him understand. ORONTE All well and good, sir; and I take your meaning. But mayn't I know what there is, in my sonnet . . . ALCESTE Candidly, sir, 'tis good . . . good closet-verse. You have been guided by the worst of models, And your expressions are not true to nature. Now what is this: And rock to sleep our pain? Or this: If nothing follow in its train? What means: Nor put yourself to such expense, To give me hope, and hope alone? What sense Is there in this: Hope and despair are one When hope lasts on—or words to that effect? This style, full of conceits, that we're so vain of, Is far from truth to life and genuineness; 'Tis merely play on words, sheer affectation, And nature speaks far otherwise than so. The wretched taste of this age makes me shudder; Rude as they were, our fathers judged far better; And I esteem all that's admired to-day Far less than this old song, which I'll say over. If the king had given me His Paris town so fair, But to have it I must leave Loving of my dear, O! I would say, "King Henry, pray Take back your Paris fair, I'd rather have my dearie, O! I'd rather have my dear." The rhyme is not exact, the style's old-fashioned; But don't you see it's worth a thousand times All your new gewgaws that good sense revolts at, And there true passion speaks its native tongue? If the king had given me His Paris town so fair, But to have it I must leave Loving of my dear, O! I would say, "King Henry, pray Take back your Paris fair, I'd rather have my dearie, O! I'd rather have my dear." That's what a really loving heart might say. (To Philinte, who laughs) Yes, Mr. Wag, in spite of all your wits, I set that far above the flowery fustian And tinsel stuff that everyone extols. ORONTE And I maintain my lines are excellent. ALCESTE You have your reasons, sir, for thinking so; But you must grant me reasons of my own, And not expect that mine shall bow to yours. ORONTE I’m satisfied to find that others prize them. ALCESTE They have the art of feigning. I have not. ORONTE D' ye think you are endowed with all the brains? ALCESTE Did I but praise your rhymes, you'd grant me more. ORONTE I'll get along quite well without your praise. ALCESTE You'll have to get along without it, please. ORONTE I'd like to have you write, in your own style, Some verses on the subject, just to see. ALCESTE I might, by bad luck, write as wretched ones; But I'd be mighty careful not to show 'em. ORONTE You talk most high and mighty; but your pride . . . ALCESTE Go seek your incense-swingers somewhere else. ORONTE Come, little sir, don't take such lofty airs. ALCESTE Faith, mighty sir, I’ll take what airs I please. PHILINTE, stepping between them Eh! sirs, you go too far. Let be, I pray you. ORONTE I’m in the wrong, of course; I’ll quit the field. I am your servant, sir, with all my heart. ALCESTE And I, sir, am your most obedient servant. SCENE III PHILINTE, ALCESTE PHILINTE Well, now you see! For being too sincere, You’ve got an ugly quarrel on your hands; I saw Oronte, on purpose to be flattered . . . ALCESTE Don't speak to me. PHILINTE But ... ALCESTE I renounce mankind. PHILINTE 'Tis too much. ALCESTE Let me be. PHILINTE If I ... ALCESTE No talking. PHILINTE But what . . . ? ALCESTE I'll hear no more. PHILINTE But ... ALCESTE Sir! PHILINTE You outrage . . . ALCESTE Zounds! 'tis too much. Don't follow me, I say. PHILINTE What nonsense! I shan't let you get away. ACT II SCENE I ALCESTE, CELIMENE ALCESTE Madam, will you allow me to speak plainly? I’m far from satisfied with your behaviour; It fills my heart with so much bitterness I feel 'twere better we break off our match; 'Twould be deception to speak otherwise; Sooner or later we must surely break. Were I to promise you the contrary A thousand times, I could not keep my word. CELIMENE So—'twas to scold at me, apparently, That you were kind enough to bring me home? ALCESTE I am not scolding. But your humour, madam, Gives any and everyone too easy access Into your heart. You have too many lovers Besieging you—a thing I can't endure. CELIMENE And must you hold me guilty of my lovers? How can I hinder men from liking me? And, when they come to pay me pleasant calls, Ought I to take a stick and drive them out? ALCESTE No stick is needed, madam, but a heart Less tender and less open to their loves. I know your charms attend you everywhere; But those your eyes attract are bound to you By your kind welcome of them, which completes The conquest of your beauty o'er their hearts. The too fond hope you’re always holding out Binds their attendance to you; somewhat less Complacence on your part, would drive away This jostling mob of suitors. Tell me, madam, By what kind fate Clitandre can have pleased you So much? On what foundation of sublime Virtue and merit in him do you base The honour of your high esteem? Perhaps 'Tis the long nail upon his little finger That won your admiration? Or it may be, The shining merit of his yellow wig Quite overcame you, as it did the rest Of high society? Or his broad ruffs About the knees, have made you love him? Or His mass of ribbons charmed you? Or, perhaps, The vast proportions of his German breeches Conquered your soul, the while he played your slave? Or did his laugh, or his falsetto voice, Find out the secret way of winning you? CELIMENE How foolishly you take offence at him! You know exactly why I treat him kindly; For he can bring me over all his friends To help me win my law-suit, as he promised. ALCESTE Then lose your law-suit, madam, bravely lose it, And don't retain a rival I detest. CELIMENE But you grow jealous of the universe. ALCESTE Because you welcome all the universe. CELIMENE This very fact should calm your foolish terrors, That I treat all with equal graciousness; You’d have more cause, by far, to be offended, Were all my favours heaped on one. ALCESTE But, madam, What have I more than all of them, I pray you? —I, whom you blame for too much jealousy! CELIMENE The happiness of knowing you are loved. ALCESTE How can my burning heart be sure of it? CELIMENE I think that since I’ve taken pains to say so, Such a confession ought to be sufficient. ALCESTE How shall I know you didn't say as much At the same time, perhaps, to all the others? CELIMENE Truly, a gallant lover's compliment! You make me out a pretty sort of person. Well, then, to save you such anxiety, I take back, here and now, all I have said; Now nothing can deceive you but yourself; I hope you’re satisfied. ALCESTE 'Sdeath, must I love you! Oh, if I could but once get back my heart, How I’d bless Heaven for such a rare good fortune! I strive with all my strength, and don't conceal it, To break the cruel bonds by which I’m bound; Still all my greatest efforts come to nothing; It must be for my sins I love you so. CELIMENE Truly, your passion is unparalleled. ALCESTE Yes, on that point I challenge all the world. My love is inconceivable; be sure No one has ever loved as I do, madam. CELIMENE That's true, your method is entirely novel, You love a woman just to quarrel with her; Only in peevish words you show your passion, And love was never such a scold before. ALCESTE It rests with you to dissipate my anger. Let us cut short all bickerings, I beg you, Speak open-heartedly, and put a stop . . . SCENE II CELIMENE, ALCESTE, BASQUE CELIMENE What is it? BASQUE Here’s Acaste. CELIMENE Well, show him up. SCENE III CELIMENE, ALCESTE ALCESTE What! Can I never have you to myself? You 're always quick to let in everybody, And can't make up your mind, in all the day, One moment to deny yourself to people? CELIMENE Must I get up a quarrel with him, too? ALCESTE You show a deference that I can't endure. CELIMENE He is a man who never would forgive me, If he should learn I didn't want to see him. ALCESTE What of it? ... and why put yourself to trouble ...? CELIMENE Good lack! From such as he, good-will's important; These people somehow have their say at court. They force themselves on every conversation; And though they cannot help you, they may harm you; No matter what support you may have elsewhere, You must not quarrel with these loud-mouthed gentry. ALCESTE In any case, and for whatever reason, You find some cause to let in everybody; And your discreet and careful policy . . . SCENE IV ALCESTE, CELIMENE, BASQUE BASQUE Madam, here is Clitandre as well. ALCESTE Precisely. (He makes as if to go.) CELIMENE Now what's this hurry? ALCESTE I am going. CELIMENE Stay. ALCESTE But what for? CELIMENE Stay. ALCESTE I can't. CELIMENE You shall. ALCESTE No use. These conversations only weary me, It is too much to ask that I endure 'em. CELIMENE You shall, you shall. ALCESTE No, 'tis impossible. CELIMENE Well then, begone. Off with you. You're quite free. SCENE V ELIANTE, PHILINTE, ACASTE, CLITANDRE, ALCESTE, CELIMENE, BASQUE ELIANTE, to Célimène The marquises are coming up with us. Have they not been announced? CELIMENE Yes. (To Basque) Chairs for all. (Basque places the chairs, and goes out.) What! (To Alceste) Not gone yet? ALCESTE No; but I shall insist That you declare yourself, for them or me. CELIMENE Be still! ALCESTE You shall declare yourself, to-day. CELIMENE You've lost your senses. ALCESTE No, you shall make known Your choice. CELIMENE So ho! ALCESTE You shall decide. CELIMENE You’re joking. ALCESTE No. You shall choose. I have endured too long. CLITANDRE Egad! I’m just from court. At the levee Cléonte did prove himself a perfect ass; Has he no friend who could enlighten him With charitable comments on his manners? CELIMENE 'Tis true, he cuts a very sorry figure Before society. He’s always startling; But when you see him after some brief absence, You find him more fantastical than ever. ACASTE Talk of fantastic characters! Egad! I’ve just encountered one of the most tedious: Damon, the talker, kept me, by your leave, Out of my chair, one hour, in the sun. CELIMENE He is a marvellous talker—one who finds The art of saying naught with many words. You can't make head or tail of his discourse, And what you listen to is only noise. ELIANTE, to Philinte Not a bad opening. The conversation Takes a fine start toward slandering our neighbours. CLITANDRE Madam, Timante's another perfect type. CELIMENE From head to foot, of mystery compact! He throws you one wild glance, and hurries by; And without business, is always busy. All that he says abounds in affectation; He wearies you to death with mannerisms; He interrupts the talk at every moment To whisper you some secret—which is nothing! He makes a marvel of the merest trifle, And even says "Good morning" in your ear. ACASTE And Gerald, madam! CELIMENE Oh, the boresome boaster! He stoops to nothing less than lord and lady, Is always moving in the highest circles, And never mentions aught but duke or prince. "The quality" has turned his head; his talk Is all of horses, carriages, and dogs. He thees and thous the men of highest rank, And just plain sir is obsolete with him. CLITANDRE They say he's on the best terms with Bélise. CELIMENE The poor in spirit! What dull company! The days she calls I suffer martyrdom; I toil and sweat to keep the conversation Alive, and constantly the barrenness Of her expression lets it die again. In vain attack upon her stupid silence You summon to your aid all commonplaces; Rain or fine weather, cold, or heat, are soon Exhausted, yet her visit, bad enough To start with, still drags on to frightful lengths; You ask what 'tis o'clock, yawn twenty times, And still she’ll budge no more than any log. ACASTE What think you of Adraste? CELIMENE Oh! what a pride! The man is so puffed up with love of self He ne'er can rest contented with the court, And makes a daily trade of cursing it, Because no office, place, or favour's granted But what he finds himself unjustly used. CLITANDRE But there's young Cleon; our best sort of people Frequent his house of late; now what of him? CELIMENE He’s made himself a merit of his cook; And 'tis his table people go to call on. ELIANTE He takes great care to serve the daintiest dishes. CELIMENE Yes; if he only didn't serve himself; His stupid person is a villainous dish That spoils, to my taste, all his finest dinners. PHILINTE Damis, his uncle, is well thought of, madam; What say you of him? CELIMENE He's a friend of mine. PHILINTE He seems a gentleman, and full of sense. CELIMENE Yes; but he’s always trying to be witty, Which drives me wild; in all his talk, he labours To be delivered of some brilliant saying. Since he has taken a notion to be clever, Nothing can hit his taste, he's grown so nice. He needs must censure everything that's written, And thinks, to praise does not become a wit, But to find fault will prove your skill and learning, And to admire and laugh belongs to fools; He thinks that by approving nothing new He sets himself above all other men. Even in conversations he finds fault; The talk's too trivial for his condescension; With folded arms, he looks in pity down From heights of wit on everything that's said. ACASTE Damme! That's just his picture, to the life. CLITANDRE, to Célimène For drawing portraits, you’re incomparable. ALCESTE On! On! Stand firm, thrust hard, my good court-friends; You give each one his turn, spare none at all; And yet no one of them could show himself. But what you'd rush to meet him, give your hand, And kiss his cheeks, and swear you were his servants. CLITANDRE But why blame us? If what is said offends you, You must address your censures to the lady. ALCESTE No, no! To you. 'Tis your approving laughter That wings these slanderous arrows of her wit. And her satiric humour feeds upon The guilty incense of your flatteries; Her heart would find less charm in raillery Were she to see it pass without applause. And so 'tis always flatterers we find To blame for vices spread among mankind. PHILINTE But why so earnest in behalf of people In whom you 'd blame yourself the selfsame faults? CELIMENE Must not the gentleman needs contradict? What! Would you have him think like other people, And not exhibit, in and out of season, The spirit of gainsaying he’s endowed with? Others' opinions are not fit for him, And he must always hold the opposite, Because he’d fear to seem like common mortals, If he were caught agreeing with anyone. The glory of contradiction charms him so He often takes up arms against himself, And falls to combating his own beliefs If he but hears them from another's lips. ALCESTE You have the laughers, madam, on your side; That's saying everything. On with your satire! PHILINTE But then, 'tis true you’re always up in arms 'Gainst everything that anybody says; And with ill-humour you admit yourself, You can't let people either blame or praise. ALCESTE Zounds! That's because they 're always in the wrong, Because ill-humour always is in season Against them; for they are, in every case, Praisers impertinent, or critics pert. CELIMENE But ... ALCESTE Madam, no! I say, though I should die for 't, You have diversions that I can't put up with; And people here are in the wrong to nourish Your inclination to the faults they blame. CLITANDRE 'Tis not for me to say; still, I'll declare That hitherto I've found the lady faultless. ACASTE I find her full of graces and attractions; But as for faults, I haven't seen them yet. ALCESTE I've seen them all, and, far from hiding it, She knows I make a point to tax her with them. The more we love, the less we ought to flatter; True love is proven by condoning nothing; For my part, I would banish those base lovers I found agreeing with my own opinions, And pandering with weak obsequiousness To my vagaries upon all occasions. CELIMENE In short, were you to rule men's hearts, they must, To show true love, renounce all compliments, And set the high ideal of perfect passion In railing handsomely at those they love. ELIANTE Love is but little subject to such laws, And lovers always like to vaunt their choice. Their passion can find naught in her to blame, For in the loved one, all seems lovable. They count her faults perfections, and invent Sweet names to call them by. The pallid maiden Is like a pure white jasmine flower for fairness; The frightful dark one is a rich brunette; The lean one has a figure lithe and free; The fat one has a fine majestic carriage; The dowdy, graced with little charm, is called A careless beauty; and the giantess Appears a goddess to adoring eyes. The dwarf is deemed a brief epitome Of heaven's miracles; the haughty maiden Is worthy of a crown; the cheat is clever; The silly dunce, so perfectly good-hearted; The chatterbox, so pleasantly vivacious; The silent girl, so modest and retiring. Thus does a lover, whom true passion fires, Love even the faults of her whom he admires. ALCESTE For my part, I maintain . . . CELIMENE Let's drop this subject, And walk a little in the gallery. What! Are you going, gentlemen? CLITANDRE and ACASTE No, madam. ALCESTE You have a mighty fear of their departure. Go when you please, sirs; but I give you notice I shall not stir till after you are gone. ACASTE Unless my presence prove importunate There’s nothing calls me elsewhere all day long. CLITANDRE If I can wait upon the king at bed time I have no other business to engage me. CELIMENE, to Alceste You must be joking, surely. ALCESTE Not at all. We 'll see if I’m the one you would be rid of. SCENE VI ALCESTE, CELIMENE, ELIANTE, ACASTE, PHILINTE, CLITANDRE, BASQUE BASQUE, to Alceste Sir, there's a man who wants to speak to you On business that, he says, can't be put off. ALCESTE Tell him I know of no such urgent business. BASQUE He 's got a jacket on with plaited coat-tails And gold all over. CELIMENE, to Alceste Go see what it is, Or rather, have him up. SCENE VII ALCESTE, CELIMENE, ELIANTE, ACASTE, PHILINTE, CLITANDRE, AN OFFICER from the Marshals' Court ALCESTE, stepping forward to meet the officer What do you want? Come in, sir. THE OFFICER Sir, I want a word with you. ALCESTE Speak out then, sir, and let me know what 'tis. THE OFFICER The honourable Marshals, whom I serve, Bid you appear before them, sir, at once. ALCESTE Who? I, sir? THE OFFICER You. ALCESTE And what for, may I ask? PHILINTE, to Alceste 'Tis your ridiculous quarrel with Oronte. CELIMENE, to Philinte What quarrel? PHILINTE They had words this morning here About some trifling lines he didn't like. The Marshals want to hush things up at once. ALCESTE I'll never stoop to any base compliance. PHILINTE You must obey their summons. Come, get ready . . . ALCESTE What sort of terms can they arrange between us? Will they condemn me by a vote to think The verses good that we disputed over? I won't take back a single word about them, I think them wretched. PHILINTE But a gentler tone . . . ALCESTE I shall not budge an inch; they're villainous. PHILINTE You ought to be the least bit tractable. Come, come along with me. ALCESTE I’ll go, but nothing Can make me take it back. PHILINTE Come show yourself . . . ALCESTE Short of a special order from the king Commanding me to think their plaguy verses Are good, I shall maintain, by heaven, they're wretched, And any man that made them merits hanging. (To Clitandre and Acaste, who laugh) By God's blood, gentlemen, I didn't know I was so entertaining. CELIMENE Go, go quickly Where you are summoned. ALCESTE Yes, I’ll go; and straight Be back again to settle our debate. ACT III SCENE I CLITANDRE, ACASTE CLITANDRE Dear Marquis, you seem quite self-satisfied; You’re pleased with everything, annoyed at nothing. Now tell me truly, are you sure—don't flatter Yourself—you’ve such great reason to be joyous? ACASTE Egad now! When I look myself well over, I can't find any cause for discontent; I'm rich, I'm young, I'm of a family That well may give itself the style of noble; And by the rank which my extraction gives me, I can lay claim to almost any office. In courage, which we all must value most, The world knows (not to boast) that I’m not lacking; They've seen me carry an affair of honour Quite dashingly and cavalierly through. With wit, of course, I’m furnished; and good taste To judge off-hand, and talk on any subject, And, when new plays come out (which I adore), On the stage-seats to act the knowing critic, Decide the drama’s fate, and lead the applause Whenever a fine passage merits bravos. I’m dexterous, handsome, have a good complexion, Especially fine teeth, a slender figure; And as for dressing well, I think, without Conceit, 'twere foolish to dispute me that. I find myself as much esteemed as can be, Loved by the fair sex, favoured by the king. And with all this, dear Marquis, I should think That any man might be self-satisfied. CLITANDRE Yes. But, since elsewhere you find easy conquests, Why waste your sighs upon this lady here? ACASTE I? Gad, not I! I'm not of make or temper To bear a fair one's coldness. Let the common And awkward fellows burn with constancy For frigid beauties, languish at their feet, Bear their rebuffs, seek help in sighs and tears, And try, by long continuance of service, To win what is denied their scanty merit. But men like me, dear Marquis, are not made To love on credit and pay all expenses. However rare may be the ladies' merits I think that I'm as good as they, thank Heaven; That to be honoured with a heart like mine, Should not, in any reason, cost them nothing; And that the least a man like me can ask, To make things fair, is meeting him half-way. CLITANDRE You think then, Marquis, you 're in favour here? ACASTE I have some reason, Marquis, so to think. CLITANDRE Trust me, divest yourself of that delusion; Dear fellow, you deceive and blind yourself. ACASTE Quite true, I do deceive and blind myself. CLITANDRE What makes you think your happiness so perfect? ACASTE I do deceive myself. CLITANDRE Upon what grounds . . . ? ACASTE I blind myself. CLITANDRE Have you trustworthy proofs? ACASTE I fool myself, I say. CLITANDRE Can Célimène Have secretly avowed some love for you? ACASTE No, I'm ill-used. CLITANDRE But answer me, I beg you. ACASTE I meet with nothing but rebuffs. CLITANDRE Have done With jesting; say what hope she’s given you. ACASTE I am the luckless one, and you the lucky. She feels for me a horrible aversion, And one of these days I must hang myself. CLITANDRE Come, Marquis, let's arrange our love-affairs, Will you, by both agreeing on one thing— If either of us show convincing proof That he’s preferred by Célimène, the other Shall give a clear field to the future victor And free him from assiduous rivalry? ACASTE Egad! I swear I like your proposition, And I agree with all my heart. But hush . . . SCENE II CELIMENE, ACASTE, CLITANDRE CELIMENE Still here? CLITANDRE Love stays our steps. CELIMENE I heard just now A carriage driving in. Who can it be? SCENE III CELIMENE, ACASTE, CLITANDRE, BASQUE BASQUE Arsinoé is coming up to see you, Madam. CELIMENE What can the woman want with me? BASQUE She's talking now to Eliante, downstairs. CELIMENE What is she thinking of? What brings her here? ACASTE She everywhere is called a perfect prude; Her zealous ardour . . . CELIMENE Yes, yes, all put on. At heart she's of the world, and does her utmost To hook some man, and yet she can't succeed. So she can only look with eyes of envy Upon another woman's train of suitors; Her sorry charms, in their abandonment, Are always railing at our age's blindness. She'd like to hide, under sham prudery, The frightful solitude that's seen about her; To save the credit of her feeble charms, She makes a crime of every power they lack. The lady, all the same, would like a lover, And even has a weakness for Alceste. The court he pays to me insults her beauty; She claims that I have stolen him from her; And in her jealous spite, but ill concealed, She secretly attacks me everywhere. I’ve never in my life seen such an idiot; Her conduct is the height of silly malice, And ... SCENE IV ARSINOE, CELIMENE, CLITANDRE, ACASTE CELIMENE Oh! What lucky chance has brought you here? In truth I was right anxious for you, madam. ARSINOE I've come to speak of something that I thought I ought to ... CELIMENE Dear! How glad I am to see you! (Clitandre and Acaste go out laughing.) SCENE V ARSINOE, CELIMENE ARSINOE Their going away was certainly most timely. CELIMENE Shall we sit down? ARSINOE It is not necessary. Friendship ought most to show itself, dear madam, In things that are of most importance to us; And since there 's none of greater import, surely, Than what concerns propriety and honour, I've come to prove my heart-felt love for you, By telling you of something that involves Your honour. Yesterday I called upon Some very virtuous friends of mine; and there The talk was all of you; your conduct, madam, That wins you so much notoriety, Had the misfortune not to be commended. This motley crowd whose visits you encourage, Your love-affairs, the rumours they give rise to, Had censors far more numerous and harsh Than I could wish. Of course, you well may know Which side I took; how I did all I could To clear you; swore you really meant no harm And said I’d vouch for it your heart was right. But still, you know there are some things in life One can't defend, however much one wants to; And so I found myself compelled to grant Your way of living was somewhat against you; That to the world it had an ugly look; That everywhere it makes all sorts of talk, And that your conduct might, if you but chose, Give far less reason for censorious judgment. Not that I think you've really failed in virtue; Heaven preserve me from that thought, at least! But still, the mere appearances of evil Are quickly credited; 'tis not enough To live uprightly for ourselves alone. I hope you have too sensible a spirit, Madam, to take amiss this useful warning, Or think it due to any other motive Than my concern for all that touches you. CELIMENE Madam, I owe you many thanks. This warning Has put me deeply in your debt; so far From taking it amiss, I shall insist Upon repaying it at once in kind By giving you a warning which concerns Your honour. Since you prove yourself my friend By telling me the common talk about me, I’ll follow, in my turn, this good example, By telling you what people say of you. Where I was visiting the other day, I met some people of especial merit, Who, in discussing true ideals of virtue, Turned their remarks upon your character, Dear madam. But your prudery and fervour Were not regarded as the best of models; Your false assumption of a grave demeanour, Your endless talk of virtue and of honour, Your mincings and your mouthings at the shadow Of coarseness that some doubtful word may have, The high esteem in which you hold yourself And pitying glances that you cast on others, Your constant preaching, and your acrid judgments On things quite innocent and honourable: All this, to be quite frank with you, dear madam, Was blamed with one accord. What is the good, They said, of all this outward show of virtue And modesty, when all the rest belies it? She's punctual at her prayers, to a degree, But beats her servants, and won't pay their wages. At public worship she displays great fervour, But paints herself, and tries to play the beauty. She has the nude in pictures covered up, But the reality, meanwhile, she likes. I took your part against them, one and all, Assuring them that this was calumny; But their opinions all combined against me, And their conclusion was, that you'd do well To meddle less with other people's conduct, And look a bit more closely to your own; That we should scrutinise ourselves no little Before assuming to condemn our neighbours, And add the weight of exemplary living To any censure that we pass on others; And even so, if needful, we should leave it, To those whom Heaven appoints to judge such matters. I hope you likewise are too sensible, Madam, to take amiss this useful warning, Or think it due to any other motive Than my concern for all that touches you. ARSINOE Whatever risk we run in our reproofs, I did not, madam, look for this retort; And I see plainly, by its bitterness, That my frank warning cut you to the quick. CELIMENE No! Say it pleased me, rather. Were folk wise Such mutual warnings would become the fashion. Given in good faith, they’d soon dispel that blindness Most of us suffer as regards ourselves. 'Twill be your fault if we should not continue This faithful service with unbated zeal, And take pains privately to tell each other What you may hear of me, and I of you. ARSINOE Ah! madam, I can hear no ill of you; It is in me that everything's to blame. CELIMENE Everything, madam, may be praised or blamed, And each is right, in proper time and season. There is an age for love-affairs, methinks, And there's an age that’s fit for prudery. It may be policy to choose the second When youth is gone and all its glamour faded, For that may serve to hide a sorry downfall. Perhaps some day I’ll follow in your footsteps, For age brings everything; but 'tis not time, As all men know, to be a prude at twenty. ARSINOE You plume yourself upon a slight advantage, And make a frightful noise about your age. The trifling difference between yours and mine Is no such mighty matter to be proud of, And I can't see why you’re so angry, madam, And fall upon me in such bitter fashion. CELIMENE I, madam, likewise cannot see just why You should let loose against me everywhere. Must I be blamed for all your disappointments, And can I help it if the men won't court you? If they love me, and will persist in paying To me addresses that you'd rather have, Why, I can't help it, and it's not my fault; The field is free for you, and I don't hinder Your having charms to win them, if you can. ARSINOE Good lack! D' ye think that anyone’s concerned About the mob of lovers you 're so vain of, Or that we cannot easily infer What price is paid to get 'em now-a-days? D' ye hope, the way things go, to make us think Your simple merit draws this motley crowd? That they’re inflamed with honourable passion, And that they court you only for your virtues? No one is blinded by such vain pretences; The world’s no dupe. I know some women, too, With charms to kindle tender sentiments, Who don't have lovers always dangling round 'em; Whereby we may infer that they’re not won Without some great advances on our part; That men don't woo us just to look at us, And all the court they pay is dearly bought. Then don't be so purled up with boastful pride For the cheap tinsel of a paltry triumph; Don't let your beauty be so self-conceited, And for so little treat folk haughtily. For if my charms could envy yours their conquests, Why, I might do as others do, methinks, And prove, by being lavish of myself, That one has lovers if one wants to have 'em. CELIMENE Then have 'em, madam; let us see it done. Try if by this rare secret you can please; And don't . . . ARSINOE Let's end this conversation, madam, 'Twill carry us too far; I should have taken My leave already, as I ought to do, If I weren't forced to wait here for my carriage. CELIMENE Stay just as long as suits you, madam. Nothing Need hurry you. But not to weary you With my attentions, here's a gentleman, Most opportunely come, to take my place And give you better company than I can. SCENE VI CELIMENE, ARSINOE, ALCESTE CELIMENE Alceste, I must go write a line or two; I can't defer it without serious loss. Please stay with madam; she will be so kind As gladly to excuse my impoliteness. SCENE VII ALCESTE, ARSINOE ARSINOE You see she wishes me to talk with you Just for a moment, till my carriage comes; Her hospitality could offer nothing More charming to me than such conversation. People of lofty merit needs must win Esteem and love from everyone; your worth Has some especial charm to make my heart Espouse your interests in every way. I wish the court would cast an eye of favour On you, and do more justice to your merits. You’ve reason to complain; I'm out of patience To see them day by day do nothing for you. ALCESTE Me, madam! Pray what claim have I upon them? What service have I rendered to the state? What brilliant deeds have I achieved to give me Cause for complaint that they do nothing for me? ARSINOE Not all those whom the court delights to honour Have always done such signal services. The opportunity as well as power Is needed; and the merit that you show Ought . . . ALCESTE Heavens! I beg you, let my merit be; How can the court be bothered about that? 'Twould have its hands too full, if it attempted To bring to light the worth of everybody. ARSINOE But brilliant worth will bring itself to light. Yours is esteemed by many, and most highly; Why, I could mention two distinguished houses Where men of weight extolled you yesterday. ALCESTE Eh! madam, now-a-days all men are praised; The present age has no distinctions left, And all is equally of dazzling merit; There is no honour brought you by such praise, Flung at your head, stuffed down your throat; I see My valet's praised too, in the Court Gazette! ARSINOE For my part, I could wish, to prove your worth, Some court employment might appeal to you. If you'll but show the least desire for it, We'll straightway set intrigues at work to serve you; I've persons at my beck and call, to help you And make the pathway smooth to all preferment. ALCESTE Madam, what would you have me do at court? My character demands I keep away, For heaven did not give me, at my birth, A soul congenial to court atmosphere. I know I don't possess the talents needful To win success, and make my fortune there. A frank sincerity is my chief merit, I've not the skill to hoodwink men with words, And anyone who lacks the gift of hiding His thoughts should make brief stay in such a country. Away from court, 'tis true, we've not that standing Or honourable rank which it bestows; But still, for compensation, we escape Having to play the part of silly fools, To bear a thousand pitiless rebuffs, To laud the rhymes of Mr. So-and-So, Burn incense at the shrine of Madam Blank, And bear the shallow wit of hare-brained lordlings. ARSINOE Then let us drop this matter of the court, Since you prefer it; but my heart is moved To pity by your love-affair. To tell you Just what I think about it, I could wish Your passion were more fittingly bestowed. You certainly deserve a kinder fate, For she who charms you is unworthy of you. ALCESTE Madam, in saying this, do you remember, I pray you, that this person is your friend? ARSINOE Yes. But it really goes against my conscience Longer to bear the wrong that 's being done you. The state I see you in afflicts my soul Too much. I warn you that your love’s betrayed. ALCESTE Madam, you’re showing much concern for me; Such news is always welcome to a lover! ARSINOE Yes, though my friend, she is, and I declare her, Unworthy to enthrall a true man's heart; And her affection for you is a sham. ALCESTE That's possible; we can't see people's hearts; But still, in charity you might refrain, Madam, from raising such a doubt in mine. ARSINOE If you prefer not to be undeceived, I'll say no more to you; that's easy enough. ALCESTE In such a case, whatever we may learn, Doubts are more torturing than any truth; And I had rather I were told of nothing Except what can be proved with certainty. ARSINOE That's right enough; and on this present matter You shall receive complete enlightenment. I'll let your own eyes prove it all to you. Only escort me home, and there I’ll show you A faithful proof of her unfaithfulness; And if your heart can love another fair, Perhaps you'll find your consolation there. ACT IV SCENE I ELIANTE, PHILINTE PHILINTE Never was seen a man so hard to manage, Or compromise so difficult to make In vain they tried to move him every way, They couldn't drag him from his fixed opinion; And never did so strange an altercation, Methinks, employ the wisdom of the Marshals. "No, gentlemen," he said, "I'll not retract; I will agree to all you please, except This one point. What is he offended at? What does he want of me? Does it reflect Upon his honour, if he can't write well? What odds to him is my opinion, which He took so much amiss; a man may be A perfect gentleman, and write poor verse. These matters do not raise the point of honour. I hold him a true man in all respects, Brave, worthy, noble, anything you will, But still, a wretched writer. I will praise, If you desire, his lavish style of living, His skill in horsemanship, in arms, in dancing; But for his verse, I beg to be excused; And if a man has not the luck to write Better than that, he ought to give up rhyming, Unless condemned to it on pain of death." In short, the only favour or concession He could with effort bring himself to grant, Was saying (as he thought, in gentler style): "I’m sorry, sir, that I’m so hard to please, And for your sake I wish with all my heart I could have liked your recent sonnet better." Whereon the Marshals forced them to embrace, And hastily hushed up the whole affair. ELIANTE His ways are very strange; yet I must own That I esteem him above other men; And this sincerity he makes a point of Has something noble and heroic in it. 'Tis a rare virtue now-a-days. I wish That everyone took pattern after him. PHILINTE The more I see of him, the more amazed I am to see this passion he’s enslaved to. With such a character as heaven gave him, I don't know how he ever came to love At all; and even less how it could be Your cousin that his fancy fixed upon. ELIANTE This only goes to show love doesn't always Depend on harmony of humours; all Their theories of sympathetic souls Are pretty, but the present case belies them. PHILINTE But do you think he's loved, from what we see? ELIANTE That is a point not easy to determine. Does she love him or not ?—how can we judge, When her own heart's not sure of what it feels? She loves sometimes without quite knowing it, And thinks she loves, too, sometimes, when she doesn't. PHILINTE I think our friend is very like to have More trouble than he looks for, with your cousin; And, to be frank, if he but felt as I do, He’d look in quite a different direction, And by a fitter choice would take advantage, Madam, of that kind favour you accord him. ELIANTE For my part, I don't try to hide my feelings, And think, in such things, we should be straightforward. I don't oppose his ardent love for her, But rather do my best to forward it; And if the matter could depend on me, I should unite him with the one he loves. But if (since anything is possible) The fates should thwart him in his choice, and if Another's love be crowned with more success, I could be glad, then, to receive his homage; His having been refused, in such a case, Would cause me no aversion. PHILINTE For my part, I likewise don't oppose your kindness, madam, For him; and he can tell you, if he will, What I have said to him upon that point. But if their marriage once for all prevented His suit to you, then I should do my utmost To win that favour which your generous heart Now grants to him; and count myself most happy If what he misses might descend to me. ELIANTE Philinte, you're jesting. PHILINTE Madam, I am speaking Now from my inmost heart. I wait the chance To make this offer unreservedly, And all my hopes are eager for that moment. SCENE II ALCESTE, ELIANTE, PHILINTE ALCESTE Ah! madam, help me to avenge a crime That triumphs over all my strength of soul. ELIANTE What is the matter? What can move you so? ALCESTE The matter is ... 'tis death to think upon it! Complete upheaval of the universe Could not o'erwhelm me more than this disaster. All's over with . . . My love ... I cannot speak. ELIANTE Try to control yourself somewhat. ALCESTE Just heaven! How can so many graces be united With hateful vices of the basest nature! ELIANTE But tell us, what can make you . . . ? ALCESTE All is ruined. I am betrayed, destroyed, stricken to death, For Célimène—ah! who could have believed it?— For Célimène deceives me; she is faithless. ELIANTE Have you sufficient grounds for that belief? PHILINTE Perhaps you are too hastily suspicious; Your jealous temper sometimes takes chimeras For . . . ALCESTE 'Sdeath! Mind your own business, will you, sir? (To Eliante) I’m all too certain of her treason, madam, Having it written down in her own hand. Yes, here 's a letter to Oronte, disclosing Her shame and my misfortune; to Oronte, Whose suit I thought she scorned, and whom I feared The least of all my rivals. PHILINTE Letters, sometimes, Are not so guilty as they may appear. ALCESTE Once more, sir, will you please let me alone, And pay attention to your own concerns? ELIANTE You ought to calm yourself. The outrage . . . ALCESTE Madam, This rests with you. To you I have recourse For power to free my heart from galling anguish. Avenge me on your false ungrateful cousin Who basely has betrayed my constant love By such a deed as must arouse your horror. ELIANTE Avenge you? I? But how? ALCESTE Accept my heart. Accept it, in that faithless woman's place; Only in that way can I be avenged; I'll punish her by the sincere attachment, Profound affection, worshipful attentions, Eager devotion, and assiduous service, My heart will henceforth offer at your shrine. ELIANTE I truly sympathise with what you suffer, And don't despise the heart you offer me; But still, perhaps the harm is not so great, And you may yet give up this wish for vengeance. For when a charming woman wrongs a man, He forms a hundred plans, but acts on none; In vain is even the strongest argument, A guilty loved one soon seems innocent; The wish to harm her quickly disappears, And lover's wrath—we all know how it wears. ALCESTE No, madam, no. I’m mortally offended. There's no relenting. I have done with her. Nothing can change my settled resolution; If I could love her still, I'd hate myself. But here she comes. My anger is redoubled At sight of her. I'll taunt her with her treason, Confound her utterly, then bring to you A heart quite freed from her delusive charms. SCENE III CELIMENE, ALCESTE ALCESTE, aside O heaven! Can I be master of my passion? CELIMENE, aside So ho! (To Alceste) Well, what’s the matter with you now? And what's the meaning of your deep-drawn sighs, And those black looks you cast in my direction? ALCESTE That all the horrors which a heart can hold Have nothing to compare with your dishonour; That fate and devils and the wrath of heaven Never produced a creature so perverse. CELIMENE A pretty compliment. I like it vastly. ALCESTE Have done with joking. 'Tis no time for laughter. Far rather blush, for you have reason to; I have full proof here of your perfidy. 'Twas this that my presentiments foretold; Not without reason was my love alarmed, And through those many doubts that you called hateful My soul foresaw the truth my eyes have found. In spite of all your care and clever feigning, My star predicted what I had to fear. But do not hope I'll suffer unavenged The sting of such a wrong. 'Tis true, I know, That will has no control of our affections, That love must always come spontaneously, That never any heart was won by force, And every soul is free to name its master. So I could find no reason for complaint If you had treated me without deceit; And though you had repulsed me from the first I could have quarrelled only with my fate. But to lead on my heart by false avowals, Why, that is treason, that is perfidy For which no punishment can be too great; And I may give free rein to my resentment. Yes, fear the worst, after such infamy; I am beside myself, I am all rage. Pierced by the deadly blow which you have struck, My reason can no longer rule my senses; I yield to impulses of righteous anger, And will not answer for the things I do. CELIMENE But tell me, whence comes this excess of passion? Have you quite lost your senses, pray? ALCESTE Yes, yes, I lost them, when I sucked the murderous poison Of my misfortune from the sight of you, And thought to find some slight sincerity In those deceitful charms that so bewitched me. CELIMENE Come now, what perfidy can you complain of?