The others await, Het Masteen said softly and nodded toward low cushions where the Consuls luggage lay ready to open upon his command. The Templar gazed thoughtfully at the weirwood rafters while the Consul dressed in semiformal evening wear of loose black trousers, polished ship boots, a white silk blouse which ballooned at waist and elbows, topaz collar cinch, black demi-coat complete with slashes of Hegemony crimson on the epaulets, and a soft gold tricorne. A section of curved wall became a mirror and the Consul stared at the image there: a more than middle-aged man in semiformal evening wear, sunburned skin but oddly pale under the sad eyes. The Consul frowned, nodded, and turned away. Het Masteen gestured and the Consul followed the tall, robed figure through a dilation in the pod onto an ascending walkway which curved up and out of sight around the massive bark wall of the treeships trunk. The Consul paused, moved to the edge of the walkway, and took a quick step back. It was at least six hundred meters downdown being created by the one-sixth standard gravity being generated by the singularities imprisoned at the base of the treeand there were no railings. They resumed their silent ascent, turning off from the main trunk walkway thirty meters and half a trunk-spiral later to cross a flimsy suspension bridge to a five-meter-wide branch. They followed this outward to where the riot of lecves caught the glare of Hyperions sun. Has my ship been brought out of storage? asked the Consul. It is fueled and ready in sphere 11, said Het Masteen. They passed into the shadow of the trunk and stars became visible in the black patches between the dark latticework of leaves. The other pilgrims have agreed to ferry down in your ship if the FORCE authorities give permission, added the Templar. The Consul rubbed his eyes and wished that he had been allowed more time to retrieve his wits from the cold grip of cryonic fugue. Youve been in touch with the task force? Oh, yes, we were challenged the moment we tunneled down from quantum leap. A Hegemony warship is  escorting us  this very moment. Het Masteen gestured toward a patch of sky above them. The Consul squinted upward but at that second segments of the upper tiers of branches revolved out of the treeships shadow and acres of leaves ignited in sunset hues. Even in the still shadowed places, glowbirds nestled like Japanese lanterns above lighted walkways, glowing swingvines, and illuminated hanging bridges, while fireflies from Old Earth and radiant gossamers from Maui-Covenant blinked and coded their way through labyrinths of leaves, mixing with constellations sufficiently to fool even the most starwise traveler. Het Masteen stepped into a basket lift hanging from a whiskered-carbon cable which disappeared into the three hundred meters of tree above them. The Consul followed and they were borne silently upward. He noted that the walkways, pods, and platforms were conspicuously empty except for a few Templars and their diminutive crew clone counterparts. The Consul could recall seeing no other passengers during his rushed hour between rendezvous and fugue, but he had put that down to the imminence of the treeship going quantum, assuming then that the passengers were safe in their fugue couches. Now, however, the treeship was traveling for below relativistic velocities and its branches should be crowded with gawking passengers. He mentioned his observation to the Templar. The six of you are our only passengers, said Het Masteen. The basket stopped in a maze of foliage and the treeship captain led the way up a wooden escalator worn with age. The Consul blinked in surprise. A Templar treeship normally carried between two and five thousand passengers; it was easily the most desirable way to travel between the stars. Treeships rarely accrued more than a four- or five-month time-debt, making short, scenic crossings where star systems were a very few light-years apart, thus allowing their affluent passengers to spend as little time as necessary in fugue. For the treeship to make the trip to Hyperion and back, accumulating six years of Web time with no paying passengers would mean a staggering financial loss to the Templars. Then the Consul realized, belatedly, that the treeship would be ideal for the upcoming evacuation, its expenses ultimately to be reimbursed by the Hegemony. Still, the Consul knew, to bring a ship as beautiful and vulnerable as the Yggdrasillone of only five of its kindinto a war zone was a terrible risk for the Templar Brotherhood. Your fellow pilgrims, announced Het Masteen as he and the Consul emerged onto a broad platform where a small group waited at one end of a long wooden table. Above them the stars burned, rotating occasionally as the treeship changed its pitch or yaw, while to either side a solid sphere of foliage curved away like the green skin of some great fruit. The Consul immediately recognized the setting as the Captains dining platform, even before the five other passengers rose to let Het Masteen take his place at the head of the table. The Consul found an empty chair waiting for him to the left of the Captain. When everyone was seated and quiet, Het Masteen made formal introductions. Although the Consul knew none of the others from personal experience, several of the names were familiar and he used his diplomats long training to file away identities and impressions. To the Consuls left sat Father Lenar Hoyt, a priest of the old-style Christian sect known as Catholic. For a second the Consul had forgotten the significance of the black clothing and Roman collar, but then he remembered St. Francis Hospital on Hebron where he had received alcohol trauma therapy after his disastrous first diplomatic assignment there almost four standard decades earlier. And at the mention of Hoyts name he remembered another priest, one who had disappeared on Hyperion halfway through his own tenure there. Lenar Hoyt was a young man by the Consuls reckoningno more than his early thirtiesbut it appeared that something had aged the man terribly in the not too distant past. The Consul looked at the thin face, cheekbones pressing against sallow flesh, eyes large but hooded in deep hollows, thin lips set in a permanent twitch of muscle too downturned to be called even a cynical smile, the hairline not so much receding as ravaged by radiation, and he felt he was looking at a man who had been ill for years. Still, the Consul was surprised that behind that mask of concealed pain there remained the physical echo of the boy in the manthe faintest remnants of the round face, fair skin, and soft mouth which had belonged to a younger, healthier, less cynical Lenar Hoyt. Next to the priest sat a man whose image had been familiar to most citizens of the Hegemony some years before. The Consul wondered if the collective attention span in the Worldweb was as short now as it had been when he had lived there. Shorter, probably. If so, then Colonel Fedmahn Kassad, the so-called Butcher of South Bressia, was probably no longer either infamous or famous. To the Consuls generation and to all those who lived in the slow, expatriate fringe of things, Kassad was not someone one was likely to forget. Colonel Fedmahn Kassad was tallalmost tall enough to look the two-meter Het Masteen in the eyeand dressed in FORCE black with no rank insignia or citations showing. The black uniform was oddly similar to Father Hoyts garb, but there was no real resemblance between the two men. In lieu of Hoyts wasted appearance, Kassad was brown, obviously fit, and whip-handle lean, with strands of muscle showing in shoulder, wrist, and throat. The Colonels eyes were small, dark, and as all-encompassing as the lenses of some primitive video camera. His face was all angles: shadows, planes, and facets. Not gaunt like Father Hoyts, merely carved from cold stone. A thin line of beard along his jawline served to accent the sharpness of his countenance as surely as blood on a knife blade. The Colonels intense, slow movements reminded the Consul of an Earth-bred jaguar he had seen in a private seedship zoo on Lusus man} years before. Kassads voice was soft but the Consul did not fail to notice that even the Colonels silences commanded attention. Most of the long table was empty, the group clustered at one end. Across from Fedmahn Kassad sat a man introduced as the poet Martin Silenus. Silenus appeared to be qu ite the opposite of the military man across from him. Where Kassad was lean and tall, Martin Silenus was short and visibly out of shape. Countering Kassads stone-cut features, the poets face was as mobile and expressive as an Earth primates. His voice was a loud, profane rasp. There was something, thought the Consul, almost pleasantly demonic about Martin Silenus, with his ruddy cheeks, broad mouth, pitched eyebrows, sharp ears, and constantly moving hands sporting fingers long enough to serve a concert pianist. Or a strangler. The poets wilver hair had been cropped into rough-hewn bangs. Martin Silenus seemed to be in his late fifties, but the Consul noticed the telltale blue tinge to throat and palms and suspected that the man had been through more than a few Poulsen treatments. Silenuss true age might be anywhere from ninety to a hundred and fifty standard years. If he were close to the latter age, the Consul knew, the odds were that the poet was quite mad. As boisterous and animated as Martin Silenus seemed upon first encounter, so the next guest at the table exuded an immediate and equally impressive sense of intelligent reticence. Sol Weintraub looked up upon introduction and the Consul noted the short gray beard, lined forehead, and sad, luminous eyes of the well-known scholar. The Consul had heard tales of the Wandering Jew and his hopeless quest, but he was shocked to realize that the old man now held the infant in his armshis daughter Rachel, no more than a few weeks old. The Consul looked away. The sixth pilgrim and only woman at the table was Brawne Lamia. When introduced, the detective stared at the Consul with such intensity that he could feel the pressure of her gaze even after she looked away. A former citizen of the 1.3-g world of Lusus, Brawne Lamia was no taller than the poet two chairs to her right, but even her loose corduroy shipsuit did not conceal the heavy layers of muscle on her compact form. Black curls reached to her shoulders, her eyebrows were two dark lines dabbed horizontally across a wide brow, and her nose was solid and sharp, intensifying the aquiline quality of her stare. Lamias mouth was wide and expressive to the point of being sensuous, curled slightly at the corners in a slight smile which might be cruel or merely playful. The womans dark eyes seemed to dare the observer to discover which was the case. It occurred to the Consul that Brawne Lamia might well be considered beautiful. Introductions completed, the Consul cleared his throat and turned toward the Templar. Het Masteen, you said that there were seven pilgrims. Is M. Weintraubs child the seventh? Het Masteens hood moved slowly from side to side. No. Only those who make a conscious decision to seek the Shrike may be counted among the pilgrims. The group at the table stirred slightly. Each must know what the Consul knew; only a group comprising a prime number of pilgrims might make the Shrike Church-sponsored trip north. I am the seventh, said Het Masteen, captain of the Templar treeship Yggdrasill and True Voice of the Tree. In the silence which followed the announcement, Het Masteen gestured and a group of crew clones began serving the pilgrims their last meal before planetfall. So the Ousters are not in-system yet? asked Brawne Lamia. Her voice had a husky, throaty quality which strangely stirred the Consul. No, said Het Masteen. But we cannot be more than a few standard days ahead of them. Our instruments have detected fusion skirmishes within the systems Ort cloud. Will there be war? asked Father Hoyt. His voice seemed as fatigued as his expression. When no one volunteered a response, the priest turned to his right as if retroactively directing the question to the Consul.